RIP (Routing Information Protocol) :

RIP - RIP is a distance vector routing protocol used by routers to exchange routing information within a network. It determines the best path to a destination based on the hop count (number of routers a packet must pass through). RIP has a maximum hop limit of 15, making it suitable for small to medium-sized networks.

Autonomous System (AS) - An Autonomous System (AS) is a collection of IP networks and routers under the control of a single organization or administrative authority that shares a common routing policy.


IGP vs EGP : 

IGP (Interior Gateway Protocol) is used for intra-domain routing – routing within a single Autonomous System (AS)
Examples: RIP, OSPF, EIGRP, IS-IS

EGP (Exterior Gateway Protocol) is used for inter-domain routing – routing between different Autonomous Systems.
Example: BGP (Border Gateway Protocol)

Distance Vector Routing Protocols (like RIP) use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to determine the best path to each network by calculating the shortest distance (metric)—usually based on hop count.


Key Features of RIP (Routing Information Protocol) :

1.Full Routing Table Sharing
  Routers share their entire routing table with neighbors.

2.Hop Count Metric
  RIP uses hop count as its metric.
  Maximum hop count = 15 (16 = unreachable).

3.Periodic Updates
  Routing updates are sent every 30 seconds (both RIPv1 and RIPv2).

4.Transport Protocol
  RIP uses UDP Port 520 to send messages.

5.Administrative Distance (AD)
  RIP has a default AD of 120 in Cisco routers.

 RIP Versions two :

1.RIPv1 (Classful)

No support for VLSM/CIDR

No authentication

Uses broadcast address: 255.255.255.255

2. RIPv2 (Classless)

Supports VLSM/CIDR

Supports authentication

Sends updates via multicast: 224.0.0.9

RIP Message Types:

RIP uses two types of messages to exchange routing information between routers:

Request Message
. Sent to ask a RIP-enabled neighboring router to share its routing table.
. Used during startup or when routing information is needed.

Response Message
. Contains the sender's full routing table.
. Sent in response to a request or during periodic updates (every 30 seconds).

. Both message types are sent using UDP Port 520.



1. Activating RIP on Interfaces
RIP is activated on network interfaces that match the specified network.
. The router checks all its interfaces and enables RIP on those that belong to the configured network.

2.Sending and Receiving RIP Updates
Sending RIP Updates
. Once RIP is enabled on an interface, the router advertises the network prefixes of the enabled interfaces. By default, RIP follows classful boundaries (i.e., classful network addresses).
. RIPv2 can be configured to disable classful behavior by using no auto-summary.

Example:

192.168.1.1/25 still gets advertised as 192.168.1.0/24

10.0.1.1/30 still gets advertised as 10.0.0.0/8

Receiving RIP Updates

. The router listens for RIP updates:

RIPv2 uses multicast address 224.0.0.9

RIPv1 uses broadcast address 255.255.255.255

. When the router receives updates from a neighboring router, it processes the information and adds valid routes to its routing table.  Every 30 seconds, RIP routers send their full routing table to neighbors, helping them stay updated.

. Handling RIP Updates

If a router receives an update from another RIP-enabled router, it checks the new routes. If valid, the router adds the new routes to its routing table.

Passive Interface in RIP :

A Passive Interface in RIP is an interface that:

1. Receives RIP Updates

The interface learns routes from neighboring RIP routers.

2. Does Not Send RIP Updates

It does not advertise routes to neighbors on that interface, preventing unnecessary updates.

3. Prevents Unnecessary Traffic

It helps reduce unnecessary RIP broadcast traffic on segments where no RIP neighbors exist.

Example: LAN segments with end-hosts (no routers involved).

3. Typical Use Cases:

LAN segments where RIP is not needed because there are no RIP neighbors.

Point-to-point links where RIP updates are necessary for routing.


RIP Load Balancing :


Metric: Hop Count

1. RIP uses hop count as its metric
A lower hop count means a better path.

2. Load Balancing Across Equal-Cost Paths

If multiple paths to a destination have the same hop count, RIP will treat them as equal-cost paths.

RIP will then load balance the traffic, sending it across these equal-cost paths.

3. Routing Table Load Balancing

Check the routing table to see if more than one path is available. If so, RIP will split the traffic between them.

4. Maximum Paths for Load Balancing

By default, RIP supports up to 4 equal-cost paths.

If you need more than 4, you can configure RIP to allow up to 6 paths (or more, depending on the router’s settings).


Command to Configure Maximum Paths :

router rip
maximum-paths 6 ( To allow up to 6 equal-cost paths )


default-information originate Command in RIP :

The default-information originate command is used in RIP to advertise a default route (0.0.0.0/0) to other RIP routers in the network. This is useful when you want to direct all traffic destined for unknown networks (typically heading towards the internet) to a default next-hop router.


commands use ;

router ip 
version 2
network 192.168.1.0
netwrok 192.16.2.0
no auto summary 
passive interface e5/0 ( for LANC side interface ) 

Main Router :


ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 next hop ip 
default inforamtion originate 


.show ip protocols

.show ip route rip

.debug ip rip - for real time updates 

.sh ip int br 

.sh run 

.sh ip int br | ex una































